Hey guys, welcome to lecture 23 and
this will be on missing data.
So we've seen a lot of examples of
how Pandas deals with null values and
missing values, so we're just gonna go and
dive a little deeper into that.
So as always just copy and paste or
type out the usual imports numpy
from pandas import Series,DataFrame and
import pandas as pd.
Right.
So we're going to learn how
to deal with missing data.
It's gonna be a really common task
when you're analyzing datasets.
So let's go ahead and make a series.
We'll just call it data.
And we'll pass a list in it.
We'll just say one, two,
sorry, a missing value.
And then four.
Let's go ahead and
see what that looks like.
Right.
So we have our series one,
two null value, four.
So how do we find these missing values?
So Pandas makes it pretty easy.
You can just pass the method is null.
And it will tell you true
if there is a null there.
So in our data index two
we have a null value.
If we pass the method is null it'll
find it and relate it back to us true.
We can also just simply drop and
remove all null values.
And if we wanna do that,
we can just say dropna and
pass that method on our data set.
And so anything that had a null value
is now gone and it's been dropped.
So that's how it works in series.
Let's see how it works in and
a data frame.
So let's make the D frame object.
We'll call it data frame.
And let's go ahead.
Pet and.
We'll make the first row
of this data frame 1, 2, 3.
We'll make the second row
start off with a null value.
Five, six.
We'll make the next one,
seven no value nine and
then the last row,
I'm just gonna make this all null values.
All right.
And then let's go ahead and
see that data frame.
Cool.
So
now we have a data frame to four by three.
And there's several null values there,
and now lets go ahead and
make another data frame called
clean dframe clean_dframe,
and see what happens,
we'll set that equal to drop na.
So, what's going to happen is, if we
drop every null value from a data frame.
Let's go ahead and see that result.
So you end up only getting a 1, 2, 3.
That first row at index 0.
What pandas does if you just
drop NA with no additional
arguments from a data frame, any row
that has any null, even if it's just 1,
is gonna be dropped from
that data frame completely.
So, we can also specify to only drop rows
that are completely missing all data.
The way we can do that is dropna,
and we can specify the method how.
And if we specify how all,
then that's gonna drop
rows where all the data was null value.
So you can see here now only the third row
was dropped since that was the only row
that had all null values.
We can also specify to drop
columns instead of rows, and
the way to do that is by
just specifying the axis.
So I'll say axis=1, and
we'd expect this to drop all of them.
Why is that?
Because if we look at our original data
frame, every single column had a null
value in it, so every single column got
dropped if we just specified axis=1.
With no additional arguments.
Cool.
So, we can threshold
the missing data as well.
For example, if you only want rows
with at least three datapoints,
to show you how that works,
let's go ahead and make another dataframe.
We'll call it dframe2.
And I'm just going to make this a,
I'll make it a four by four.
And to make this go a little faster,
what I'm gonna do before I
start this data frame is,
I'm going to set npn = np.null,
excuse me, np.nan.
That way, I can just write npn.
So let's start off with our first row.
I'm going to say 1, 2, 3.
And then last value npn.
Second row, we'll do 2, npn, 5, 6.
Next row the list we'll put in is npn 7,
npn 9 and
then the last one will just be one with
the remaining three values be npn, so
that should give us a four by four.
And then let's go ahead and
see what that looks like.
Cool, so now we've created our data
frame with a bunch of null values.
So if you want a threshold by
number of actual data points,
points that don't have a null,
you can do that.
So you can say dropna, and
then pass the thresh argument.
So, that's thresh, and
let's say I only want rows that
have at least two data points.
So I can pass the threshold two and
let's see what that comes up with.
So now since the last row,
one null null null, didn't have a minimum
of two data points it was dropped.
The other rows, even though they have null
values have at least two value points.
So they weren't dropped
when I put the threshold.
Let's go ahead and
just make sure that we understand it, so
I'm gonna drop NA with
a threshold of three.
So just think about for a second which
rows you think are gonna be dropped.
Remember threshold is gonna drop any
row without at least three data points.
Cool, so the first two rows index 0 and 1,
have at least 3 data points,
so they got to stay.
Let's take a look at dframe 2 again,
the original.
All right, so let's say you wanted to fill
where you had null values
instead of just dropping them.
You can do that with the fillna method.
So if I wanted to fill all
the null values if one,
I can pass the argument
one into fillna and
now any values that had null,
for instance,
this last row now have a one value there.
Great.
Let's go ahead and
sorry I called the original D frame let's
check it on D frame two, there we go.
Now that makes sense,
we have our four by four.
Awesome.
So, what else can we do.
We can also fill in different values for
different columns.
So, to show you how that works
we'll call it on our deframe two.
Let's just see what that looks like.
The original still has
all our null values.
Remember since we're not setting
anything equal to these method calls,
since I'm not saying dframe2
equals dframe2.fillna,
we're not making actual
permanent changes to the dframe.
So I can always call it and still have
those null values, so dframe2.fillna.
If I want to fill in different values for
different columns what I can
do is I can pass a dictionary.
So, let's say the zero column,
I want any null values filled with zero.
The one column,
I want any values filled with one.
Null values that is.
And then, we can do the same thing for
the other two columns.
And take a minute, think about what this
is gonna look like before we see it.
Let's see if we got it.
All right, cool.
Now anywhere there was a null
value in a particular column
we replaced it with
the number of that column.
If we look at column two, for instance,
the last two now have a value of two.
Excellent.
If we wanna modify the existing object,
there's two ways we can do that.
We can either say
dframe2 =
dframe2.fillna, etc.
That's a method of affecting
the dataframe permanently,
but if you wanna modify it in place, and
not have to type in equals, like that.
We can pass the argument in place.
So, fillna, that would fill all
those null values with a zero.
Notice that I called dframe two again,
those values go back to null.
If I want to make the change permanent.
Then I can say fillna 0, and
I'm gonna pass the argument inplace.
If I set it as true, that means it's
gonna modify the existing object.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at dframe 2 now, and
you'll notice, just calling the dframe 2,
I no longer get null values.
It's been permanently changed to have
zeros instead of that null value.
All right, so now that we've learned
how to deal with missing data,
next we'll learn about index hierarchy.
I'll see you there.